---
layout: post
title: "A dive into MQTT"
description: ""
category:
tags: []
---
{% include JB/setup %}
# Motivation

Some time ago, I participated to a [W3C workshop about Web Payments](http://www.w3.org/2013/10/payments/final_report.html), in which I was
a panelist on the tough subject of Identity, Privacy and Security.

In my talk, I suggested that the IoT would be a great opportunity to secure
payments, or even more. But before writing something specific on that subject,
I felt that I had to get more into the IoT protocols and standards details.

So here are my thoughts about one widely available "ecosystem" of the IoT: [MQTT](http://mqtt.org/).

# Why MQTT

My experience with IoT protocols is limited, but I have a lifetime interest in
embedded devices talking to each other. It all started in the 1980's with personal
computers crawling at a one to eight MHz of CPU power, featuring a few kilobytes of memory,
and connected to each other using unreliable modems, able to deliver data at a
blazing speed of 2400 bauds (or bits per second).

We find ourselves in the same situation now, except that wearables and sensors have
replaced computers, and analog modems have been replaced by radio networks.

From the IoT protocols, that have all their advantages and drawbacks, I chose
to study MQTT first, as it is the simplest one of the popular contenders in this
field. Also it seems to me that it shines in addressing a few specific topics,
which are message transportation and delivery. It comes in two "flavors", which
are MQTT and MQTT-SN, designed for non-IP networks.

For the purpose of this study, I will not address differences between MQTT
and MQTT-SN, and use "MQTT" as a generic term for both.

## The good

First things that are ultimately important are the publish/subscribe model, and
the client/server model (more on this one later).

To properly address the variety of devices that will belong to the IoT, it seems
to me that you cannot use one-size-fits-all architectures and requirements.

You cannot ask an Arduino board's 8-bit micro-controller to use its scarce
capabilities to handle a full stack of first-class security and authentication
services. MQTT is a client/server architecture, where the server is asked to
address most of the issues that might occur, and it's a perfectly sane design
decision.

Also, even if the current specification doesn't explicitly address the topic of
bridges (chains of MQTT brokers arranged as trees), one of the reference
implementations of a MQTT broker, namely [Mosquitto](http://mosquitto.org/),
provides this feature.
This seems to be the right way to go: make good use of your scarce resources at
the leafs of the tree, and enforce availability and security at the right level,
for each step where they become an issue.

Apart for the implied architecture, here are some things that, in my opinion,
really shine in MQTT design:

- Failure is addressed from the start, with the "Will" flags, and the
"Clean Session" flag, the first ones stating what should happen in the case of a
network failure since the start, the second one stating what should be done when
the reconnection happens.
- The publish/subscribe model address more use cases than a peer-to-peer model.
- The QoS levels, from "Fire and Forget" to "Unique, confirmed delivery".

## The bad

Not much in this field. The Topics naming and filtering rules are a bit
confusing, but it may come from me.

## The ugly

Security. Again. Authentication enforced by the use of Usernames and Passwords ?
No, just no. Worse, the MQTT 3.1 specification states that "It is recommended
that passwords are kept to 12 characters or fewer, but it is not required".
It has been removed in the 3.1.1 version that is currently being written, but it
still leaves a bad taste in my mouth that such things could have seen the light
of the day.

Fortunately, I'm not the only one that see an issue here:
- [Protocols and Access keys.](http://pzf.fremantle.org/2014/03/internet-of-things-protocols-and-access.html)
- [Using OAuth 2.0 with MQTT.](http://pzf.fremantle.org/2013/11/using-oauth-20-with-mqtt.html)

So, here is my piece of advice about addressing security in MQTT: **don't**.

MQTT is a specification for transportation and delivery of messages. Just keep it
this way. Of course, security must be addressed somehow, but please, please,
make it a subject on its own.

Let's take an example of some well-known protocols: SMTP, POP3, HTTP and FTP.
Two of them are ruling the Internet still now (for the good and the bad):
HTTP and SMTP, whereas the two other ones, FTP and POP3, have been superseded,
and any sensible IT manager would just refuse to support them anymore
(unfortunately, IT guys are not always listened to).

Guess which protocols tried to address security, and failed? To be fair, they
were perfectly acceptable at the time of their writing, but things are not meant
to last forever, and when it comes to subjects such as identity, privacy and
security, any small issue quickly becomes unacceptable.

Fortunately, it seems that it goes in the right direction: the security-related
topics are placed into a dedicated, **Non-normative** chapter. Phew!

# An opportunity for decentralization

## Why it does matter

Security has to be addressed, of course. But beyond protecting data with cryptography,
this is the subject of *Identity* that is the main concern, because it is all about *trust*.

It has been written and said so much about censorship, privacy and surveillance
these last months, that I won't bother trying to explain why relying on one or many
central organizations is an issue.

The IoT is yet to be built, and we have the opportunity to define a new set of
standards. That's not something quite common, so why not take our chance at the
maximum, and try to address topics such as decentralization?

The Web is a decentralized platform by nature. However, recent issues have shown
that there are in fact too few companies and technologies on which it relies on.

Why not take a step forward, and **enforce** decentralization at the standards level?

This may sound weird, especially due to the client/server nature of MQTT, but I
think it can (and should) be done.

## The fate of the trusted provider

MQTT relies on providers. Of course, you're perfectly free to choose one, which
however you'll have to **trust** and hope it doesn't go out of business.

You may know the [WebID standard](http://www.w3.org/wiki/WebID). While perfectly
suitable for the addressed topic, it somewhat fails, as there hasn't been a lot
of companies/individuals that provided and maintained providers.

[Mozilla's Persona](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/persona/) tries to address
related issues, also relies on "identity providers", and fails as well.

## A distributed future ?

> "The future has already arrived. It's just not evenly distributed yet." - William Gibson

I think most people agree with the idea of decentralization is a good thing. Nobody has the desire
of being put under control of an organization. However, it feels better than a lack of service.
And building an efficient distributed system where the components are not under control is
an incredibly hard task.

There have been many attempts, and some of them worked. I'm thinking about *Bittorrent* and
cryptocurrency schemes such as *Bitcoin*.

I swear I've been looking for other ways to express why these distributed networks actually
work, i.e. why people actually use them at a large scale, but I couldn't find a better
word than *greed*. Yes, greed. What makes the incentive-based systems actually work.

With *Bittorrent*, your reward is a better download speed when you contribute to upload
as well, with *Bitcoin*, verifying other people's transactions to ensure the blockchain's
integrity rewards you with some coins.

It may come a time when solely protecting other people's privacy or anonymity will be
a reward by itself, but meanwhile, my bet remains on greed as well. :)

EDIT: [This article by Jon Evans](http://techcrunch.com/2014/03/22/enter-the-blockchain-how-bitcoin-can-turn-the-cloud-inside-out/) is a quite close match of what I'm trying to explain (I wish I had found it earlier).

# MQTT + DHT, paving the way for the #DIoT

> "Talk is cheap. Show me the code." - Linus Torvalds

Alright, then. I've started [this fork of Mosquitto](https://bitbucket.org/torlus/mosquitto-dht) that uses [some work of Juliusz Chroboczek on Bittorrent](http://www.pps.univ-paris-diderot.fr/~jch/software/bittorrent/).
It is intended to be a proof-of-concept and not much has been done yet, as I've been more
into thinking on how to address the different issues.

- The first issue is having a first network (and associated protocols) for peers to know
the existence of others. [Kademlia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kademlia) seems perfectly
fine for this subject. Hence the DHT stuff.
- The second issue is to provide an alternative protocol to Bittorrent, as we're
not dealing with the same kind of objects: Bittorrent deals mostly with static files,
whereas we'll be dealing with short-lived messages. There is also the issue of topic searching
and matching that should be efficient. I'm thinking about [different hash functions](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Locality-sensitive_hashing) to optimize it.

Apart from this work, I'm considering another way to handle this: add a MQTT broker
to the [Twister](http://twister.net.co/) project, that addresses many common subjects...
After all, MQTT could be seen as some kind of microblogging protocol. :)

Stay tuned!
